Title: How to find good heatsink for a MOSFET
Date: 05.10.2019
Modified: 05.10.2019
Category: Article
Status: draft
Tags: hardware, mosfets
Slug: mosfet-heatsink
Authors: Andrey Albershtein
Summary: How to find a appropriate heatsink for MOSFET
lang: en

In this little note I will try structure information about thermal resistance
and how to find proper heatsink for transistor or diode. I will go a little bit
in details on what is thermal resistance and how it used in calculations. If you
find any mistakes or want to comment something please see end of the page.

#### Overview

TODO lifetime of MOSFET depending on temp https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Negative-bias_temperature_instability

Why to even have heatsink? There is a few reasons for that. First of all high
temperature of the component can damage the circuit and device itself; Imagine
200 C MOSFET sitting on your PCB. Secondly, too high working temperature of the
component dramatically decrease its live and assures that it won't be reliable
[\[6\]][6]. 

#### Before Starting - Requirements

Let's decide what is working condition of our component. I will be looking at
the P-channel MOSFET transistor [AOD4185][5].

* What is the drain current $I_D$? In my application it is 5 A at peak and 1 - 3
  A on average.
* What is drain-source resistance? For AOD4185 it is $20\ m\Omega$
* What is maximum ambient temperature in which device is suppose to operate?
  Let's take 25C (based on [\[1\]][1], [\[2\]][2] and [\[6\]][6] it is suitable
  value for the most cases). 
* What is maximum MOSFET's temperature? Datasheet says that maximum working
  temperature is 175C let's take about the middle 90C.

#### How and how much power does MOSFET dissipate?

bom bom electrons bom bom colision with other stuff bom bom heat

#### What is thermal resistance?

Thermal resistance show how big is temperature difference in two points for a
Watt of applied power. For example, for given thermal resistance of 3 C/W the
temperature will differ for 3 C for every applied Watt.

<!-- P = \frac{T_j - T_a}{R} = \frac{120^{\circ}\text{C}-
25^{\circ}\text{C}}{52^{\circ}\text{C/W}} = 1.82 W -->
<div id="mosfet" class="wide-boi"></div>

<div id="dynamic_formula">
\begin{equation*}
P = \frac{T_j - T_a}{R} = \frac{\cssId{df_junction_temperature}{120}^{\circ}\text{C}-
25^{\circ}\text{C}}{2.4^{\circ}\text{C/W}} = \cssId{df_max_power}{39.82} W 
\end{equation*}
</div>

So, the thermal resistance shows us how hard it is for energy to move
through the material. Material with really high resistance is a good insulator
and therefore is really bad for electronics as it will keep all the heat inside.

\begin{equation*}
\textrm{Thermal resistance} = \frac{\textrm{Thickness}}{\textrm{Thermal conductivity}}
\end{equation*}

**An example.** From the equation above we see that resistance decrease with
higher value of thermal conductivity. Let's pick two different materials which
are definitely differently conduct heat. From [this table][8] we find out that
thermal conductivity of glass and copper is $k_{glass} = 0.2$ and $k_{copper} =
400$ $[W\cdot m^{-1}K^{-1}]$ accordingly. For the same thickness of the material
the resistance will be $R_{glass} = 5$ and $R_{copper} = 0.0025\ [K/W]$.
Enormous difference as expected. Therefore, the lower thermal resistance the
more energy gets from the hot point to the cool one.

In the ideal case when thermal resistance is zero the temperature will be the
same on both sides of the material. If we imagine ideal heatsink connected
directly to the junction of the transistor with $R = 0\ K/W$ the than we will be
able to keep $T_{junction}$ equal to $T_{ambient}$.

#### How much heat is generated?

**Heat generated by transistor**. So, our junction (PN-junction) carries some
current. The junction has some resistance. Due to this resistance part of the
current is converted into heat.  We would like to keep our junction calm and
cool to not melt everything around and also keep it in its operating range
(e.g. resistance, voltages, current).

So, we would like to drain some heat from a junction to the surrounding
environment. But firstly this heat has to move from the junction itself to the
case of the transistor and then to to the heatsink (or directly into
environment).

We can start from calculation how much heat/power will be dissipated in our
junction. To do so we just calculate power over the Drain-Source junction of the
MOSFET $P = I^2R = 0.5\ [W]$, where I is the main current flow through the
transistor. The R is resistance over the Drain-Source junction.

Dissipation also depends on how frequent you switch the MOSFET. But it plays
role only in case if your have medium or high frequency (values? nuh). This post
doesn't include it.

**A little bit of math**. With the following equation we can calculate:

* How much power transistor can handle
* How hot will it be at certain power dissipation

Let's look at some examples. Firstly, we need to choose maximum allowed
temperature of the transistor. It is definitely shouldn't be higher than max
temperature from datasheet $T_{j max}$. I took 100C as it is still far away from
maximum and not so low as it will require much more sophisticated cooling. 
We also need to pick some initial ambient temperature - let it be 25C. So, the
temperature of a junction can be calculated with following equation:

\begin{equation*}
T_j = P_d (R_{jc} + R_{ca}) + T_a,\textrm{ where }T_a = 25C,\ T_j = 100C
\end{equation*}

$R_{jc}$ and $R_{ja}$ are thermal resistances from datasheet. $jc$ means
junction-to-case and $ja$ means junction-to-ambient. The former tells as what is
the thermal resistance of the transistor when energy moves from junction to
case and the latter is from junction to ambient accordingly.

\begin{equation}
R_{ca} + R_{js} = \frac{T_j - T_a}{P_d}
\end{equation}

**Real case calculations**. From datasheet we can find out that $R_{jc} = 2\
C/W$ and $R_{ja} = 50\ C/W$. TODO what does it mean. 

The maximum dissipated power is 62.5 watts

That can be suitable
if you switching small loads. But if it is too much we need to calculate what
thermal resistance should be to suite our conditions. As we can't cool
transistor from inside we will need to cool the case. Therefore, we need to find
Rca. From the equation above we can derive that:

\begin{equation*}
R_{ca} = \frac{T_j - T_a}{P_d} - R_{js} = \frac{100 - 25}{5^2\cdot0.04} - 2 = 73\ C/W
\end{equation*}

In this case we don't need heatsink as thermal resistance from junction to
ambient is 50 C/W ($R_{ja}$ from datasheet). That means that by default for this
particular MOSFET the temperature difference between junction and environment


Let's look at what happens if TODO in 20 A:

\begin{equation*}
R_{ca} = \frac{T_j - T_a}{P_d} - R_{js} = \frac{90 - 25}{20^2\cdot0.04} - 2 = 2.68\ C/W
\end{equation*}

TODO [13][13] show that this package without heatsink can dissipate N Watts at
max

TODO Look into this https://www.thing-printer.com/power-dissipation-calculations-in-mosfets/

#### Which heatsink to pick?

The nicest one =)

#### References:

* [StackExchange Question 1][1]
* [StackExchange Question 2][2]
* [StackExchange Question 3][11]
* [StackExchange Question 4][12]
* [Understanding Thermal Dissipation and Design of a Heatsink][3]
* [Heatsink Calculations][4]
* [AOD4185 Datasheet][5]
* [The Design of Heatsinks][6]
* [List of thermal conductivities][8]
* [Heatsink Calculator][9]
* [Power MOSFET Basics][10]
* [Infineon - Maximizing the Effectiveness of your SMD Assemblies][13]

[1]: https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/39188/how-to-find-a-fitting-cooler-heatsink-for-a-mosfet
[2]: https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/272718/mosfet-how-to-determine-if-a-heatsink-is-required
[3]: http://www.ti.com/lit/an/slva462/slva462.pdf
[4]: https://www.re-innovation.co.uk/docs/heatsink-calculations/
[5]: https://datasheet.lcsc.com/szlcsc/Alpha-Omega-Semicon-AOS-AOD4185_C77993.pdf
[6]: https://sound-au.com/heatsinks.htm
[7]: 
[8]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_thermal_conductivities
[9]: http://mustcalculate.com/electronics/heatsink.php
[10]: https://www.infineon.com/dgdl/mosfet.pdf?fileId=5546d462533600a4015357444e913f4f
[11]: https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/414157/mosfet-thermal-resistance
[12]: https://electronics.stackexchange.com/questions/246622/power-dissipation-of-power-mosfet
[13]: https://www.infineon.com/dgdl/Infineon-an-994-AN-v06_00-EN.pdf?fileId=5546d46265f064ff01667ab5829d4d44

<script src="https://d3js.org/d3.v4.js"></script> 
<script src="https://unpkg.com/d3-simple-slider"></script>

<script>
function interactive_mosfet(data) {
	document.body.querySelector("#mosfet").append(data.documentElement);

    var width = 800
    var height = 300

    var resistance = 2.4;
    var temp_ambient = 25;
    var temp_junction_max = 175;

	var mf = d3.select("#svg1330")
	mf.attr("width", width.toString())
	mf.attr("height", height.toString())
	
	var junction = mf.select("path#junction_heat") //.attr("opacity", "0")
	
	function change_opacity(value){
    var normalizer = 0.00342857143
    var valueNorm = value*normalizer
		console.log("change: " + valueNorm.toString())
		junction.style("opacity", valueNorm.toString())
	}

    function change_formula(value){
        var temperature = Math.trunc(value);
        var max_power = ((value - temp_ambient)/resistance).toFixed(2);

        window.document.getElementById("df_junction_temperature").innerText = temperature.toString();
        window.document.getElementById("df_max_power").innerText = max_power.toString();
    }

    function update_vizualization(temperature, power){
        var value = 0;
        if(power){
            value = power*resistance + temp_ambient;
        } else{
            value = temperature;
        }
        change_opacity(value);
        change_formula(value);

        if(value > temp_junction_max){
            mf.select("text#oh_text").style("opacity", 1.0)
            mf.select("#oh_background").style("opacity", 1.0)
        } else {
            mf.select("text#oh_text").style("opacity", 0.0)
            mf.select("#oh_background").style("opacity", 0.0)
        }
    }

    // Temperature slider
    /*var sliderTemperature = d3
      .sliderLeft()
      .min(temp_ambient)
      .max(temp_junction_max)
      .height(height)
      .ticks(4)
      .default(120)
      .on('onchange', val => {
          update_vizualization(val, '');
    });

    var gSliderTemperature = mf
      .append('g')
      .attr("id", "slider-layer-temperature")
      .attr('transform', 'translate(8,1) scale(0.1,0.1)');

    gSliderTemperature.call(sliderTemperature);*/

    // Power slider
    var sliderPower = d3
      .sliderLeft()
      .min(0.19)
      .max(100)
      .height(height)
      .ticks(4)
      .default(39.82)
      .on('onchange', val => {
        update_vizualization('', val);
    });

    var gSliderPower = mf
      .append('g')
      .attr("id", "slider-layer-power")
      .attr('transform', 'translate(18,1) scale(0.1,0.1)');

    gSliderPower.call(sliderPower);

    // Should be after adding slider
    // mf.select("g#slider-layer-temperature")
      // .selectAll("text")
      // .attr("font-size", "20");

    mf.select("g#slider-layer-power")
      .selectAll("text")
      .attr("font-size", "20");

    // d3.select('p#value-vertical').text(d3.format('.2%')(sliderTemperature.value()));
    d3.select('p#value-vertical').text(d3.format('.2%')(sliderPower.value()));

}

var mos_svg = d3.xml("../images/mosfet_handdrawn.svg", interactive_mosfet)
</script>
